docs(color): DLT-2568 chart design tokens (#838)
dialpad/dialtone: apps/dialtone-documentation/docs/design/colors/chart-colors/index.md

---
title: Chart Colors

> description: Chart Colors are crucial for clear communication, but inconsistent color usage can hinder comprehension and create visual noise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Chart color guidance to communicate data clearly.
```
Keep it simple since this line serves as both intro paragraph and within the [Colors page card](https://dialtone.dialpad.com/deploy-previews/pr-838/design/colors/).

Definitely don't need to negative language of "...but inconsistent color usage..."

---

## Overview & Purpose

> <div class="d-bgc-brand d-bar8 ">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class="d-bgc-brand d-bar8 d-mb16">
```

>  <svg-loader name="chart-header" />

Reviewer: <img width="1091" height="594" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/488bebc1-5a5d-44cc-8ffa-10551673f22f" />

I know it's empty on the right because you removed something that used to be there, but now it's just off-balance.

Center the donut chart, have token chips `color.chart.categorical.05` and `color.chart.categorical.04` on the left. Redistribute all token chips to be balanced.

 </div>

Data visualization is crucial for clear communication, but inconsistent color usage can hinder comprehension and create visual noise.
**Chart Color Tokens** provide a unified, robust, and accessible system for coloring data visualizations  across all Dialpad products.

These tokens are designed to:

- **Ensure Visual Consistency:** Guarantee a cohesive look and feel for data insights.
- **Enhance Accessibility:** Provide high-contrast, color-blind friendly palettes out-of-the-box.
- **Streamline Workflow:** Offer a single source of truth for both designers and developers, reducing guesswork and speeding up development.
- **Improve Maintainability:** Simplify global color updates and future-proof our data experiences.

<div class="d-m32"></div>

## Types

> We have 4 types or groups of colors, these are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Remove.

- Single color
- Semantics
- Categorical

> - Sequential

Reviewer: Jump link for each.
```suggestion
1. [Single Color](#single-color)
2. [Semantic](#semantic)
3. [Categorical](#categorical)
4. [Sequential](#sequential)
```

> - Sequential

Reviewer: We need a _**very**_ basic Chart example of each of these demonstrating that Chart Type, to be placed below each of their initial paragraphs. Maybe that can be a follow-up task logged under same epic, unless you want to take a quick stab at it.

Author: https://github.com/dialpad/dialtone/pull/838#issuecomment-3189670908

> ### Single color

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Single Color
```

> Use to provide clear visual feedback for user interactions or specific visual conditions of chart elements. These apply broadly to chart components. Treat this one as a default, if you have doubts on which color to use, use this one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use for data visualizations that only require a single color, with `chart.color.accent` as the default.

Conversely, to bring to focus a data point within a set, use `chart.color.accent` for the focused data point and `chart.color.neutral` for the rest.
```

**When to Use:**

- Basic data points.
- Indicating selected chart series or segments.
- Dimming or disabling inactive chart elements.

<token-table :tokens="singleColorTokens" theme="light" :show-value="false" />

> ### Semantics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Semantic
```

> Use to convey inherent meaning, status, severity, or sentiment (e.g., positive, negative, warning, informational, or brand-specific).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply colors that associate meaning to the data points, such as status, severity, or sentiment.
```

**When to Use:**

- Performance Dashboards: Showing status (on-track, at-risk, complete).
- Alerts/Notifications: Highlighting critical data points.
- Sentiment Analysis: Representing positive, neutral, or negative sentiment.
- Brand Alignment: Emphasizing data related directly to Dialpad's core identity.

<token-table :tokens="semanticTokens" theme="light" :show-value="false" />

### Categorical

> Purpose: To differentiate distinct, unrelated categories of data where the color itself does not carry inherent meaning (e.g., comparing product lines, regions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply unique colors to distinguish two or more unrelated data where color carries no meaning. Use in the predetermined numerical order, e.g. `01, `02`, etc. This ensures applied data can be visually distinguished from its adjacent data.
```

- Understanding Hover/Selected: Remember that hover and selected states for specific chart series (single color, semantic, categorical, and sequential) have predetermined contrasting colors, ensuring consistent interaction feedback.
- Prototyping: Use these tokens in your Figma prototypes to demonstrate interactive states and theme switching.

## Known Issues & Troubleshooting

While this system aims for robustness, be aware of potential challenges during implementation and adoption:

- Charting Library Overrides: Some charting libraries might aggressively override inline styles or custom properties, requiring careful mapping or deeper customization.
- Complex Color Logic: For very custom data-driven color calculations beyond simple references (e.g., dynamic gradients based on data range), you might still need to implement logic in code that consumes these Chart Color design tokens.
- Transitioning Existing Charts: Migrating older charts not using design tokens will require dedicated refactoring effort.

## Do and Don'ts

> ### Use the colors in the right order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Apply Categorical colors in numeric order
```

<dialtone-usage>
<template #do>
 <div class="d-bar8"> <svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="chart-dondont-1-1" />
 </div>
Use categorical and sequential colors in their predetermined order, e.g. 01, 02, 03, etc.
</template>

<template #dont>
 <div class="d-bar8"> <svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="chart-dondont-1-2" />
 </div>
Avoid using categorical and sequential colors out of order, e.g. 10, 03, 05, etc.

</template>

</dialtone-usage>

> ### Limit the number of colors used in one graph to 6 max

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Limit chart colors
```

<dialtone-usage>
<template #do>
 <div class="d-bar8"> <svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="chart-dondont-2-1" />
 </div>

> When displaying information, limit the number of colors used in one graph to 6 max.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where possible, limit the number of colors in a single graph to no more than 6. 
```
There may be acceptable cases where a chart has to have more than 6, so this at least encourages designers to be judicious.

</template>

<template #dont>
 <div class="d-bar8"> <svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="chart-dondont-2-2" />
 </div>

> If you use more than 6 colors, the chart will be too complex and hard to read. Try show the most important data using the first 6 colors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using more than 6 color may make the chart difficult to parse. Exhaust design possibilities before going beyond.
```

</template>

</dialtone-usage>

> ### Don’t use more than one color in your data visualization if the additional colors don’t serve any communication purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use multiple colors only with purpose
```

<dialtone-usage>
<template #do>
 <div class="d-bar8"> <svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="chart-dondont-3-1" />
 </div>

> Don’t use more than one color in your data visualization if the additional colors don’t serve any communication purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use more than one color only when it serves the data's communication.
```

</template>

<template #dont>
 <div class="d-bar8"> <svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="chart-dondont-3-2" />
 </div>
- Add too many call-to-action elements to the same card. A card should only contain a single primary action.

> - Inform users about important changes.

Reviewer: Bad copy/paste? What's this `chart-dondont-3-2` saying?

Author: woops, i copied the do and don't template from cards, and forgot to change that text, solve it! thanks

</template>

</dialtone-usage>

> ### Add visual separator using white space

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use space to separate data
```

<dialtone-usage>
<template #do>
 <div class="d-bar8"> <svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="chart-dondont-4-1" />
 </div>
- To display content and actions on a single topic.
</template>

<template #dont>
 <div class="d-bar8"> <svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="chart-dondont-4-2" />
 </div>
- Add too many call-to-action elements to the same card. A card should only contain a single primary action.
- Inform users about important changes.
</template>

</dialtone-usage>

> ### Best Practices
> 
> - It should only contain a single idea that may feature a call-to-action, or the option to navigate to more detailed content.
> - The content of a card should be concise and offer only a preview of detailed content.
> - The headings should set clear expectations about the card’s purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Remove. A more intentional documentation task should be backlogged.

> ## Contribution & Feedback
> 
> This is a living system. Your feedback is crucial for its continuous improvement.
> 
> - Found a missing token?
> - Have a use case not covered?
> - Encountered an issue?
> 
> Please reach out to the Design Systems team or submit an issue/request [here](https://dialpad.atlassian.net/servicedesk/customer/portal/123/create/465).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Remove.

 </div>
Using more than 6 color may make the chart difficult to parse. Exhaust design possibilities before going beyond.
</template>

</dialtone-usage>

### Use multiple colors only with purpose

<dialtone-usage>
<template #do>
 <div class="d-bar8">
  <svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="chart-dondont-3-1" />
 </div>
Use more than one color only when it serves the data's communication.
</template>

<template #dont>
 <div class="d-bar8">
  <svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="chart-dondont-3-2" />
 </div>
Using more than one color without purpose may make the chart difficult to parse and could confuse the user on the data's communication.
</template>

</dialtone-usage>

### Use space to separate data

<dialtone-usage>
<template #do>
 <div class="d-bar8">
  <svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="chart-dondont-4-1" />
 </div>
Use space to separate data and make it easier to understand to the user.
</template>

<template #dont>
 <div class="d-bar8">
   <svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="chart-dondont-4-2" />
 </div>
Avoid mixing the tokens next to each other as much as possible, so keep a space to separate data and more digestible for the user.
</template>

</dialtone-usage>

> ## Accesibility Guidelines

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Accessibility Guidelines
```

  - Labels/Text: Directly annotating data points with values.
  - Icons/Patterns: Using distinct icons or patterns for categories.
  - Shapes/Stroke Styles: Varying shapes, line styles (dashed, dotted), or stroke widths.
- Theming Impact: Token values are specifically defined for both light and dark modes to ensure optimal contrast and readability in any theme.

## Known Issues & Troubleshooting

While this system aims for robustness, be aware of potential challenges during implementation and adoption:

- Charting Library Overrides: Some charting libraries might aggressively override inline styles or custom properties, requiring careful mapping or deeper customization.
- Complex Color Logic: For very custom data-driven color calculations beyond simple references (e.g., dynamic gradients based on data range), you might still need to implement logic in code that consumes these Chart Color design tokens.
- Transitioning Existing Charts: Migrating older charts not using design tokens will require dedicated refactoring effort.

<script setup>
import DesignColorTable from '@baseComponents/DesignColorTable.vue';
import ThemeColorTable from '@baseComponents/ThemeColorTable.vue';

> import ColorsCatalog from '@views/ColorsCatalog.vue';

Reviewer 2: These 3 imports above aren't used
